# What is an Algebra?

I am sure that you, at some point, went through high school or secondary school and took Algebra, but this is not what I mean by an algebra. My first encounter with the term **an** algebra was when I was learning stochastic differential equations. Pretty much one of the first things you get greeted with if you do any precursory reading on the topic is the concept of a $\sigma$ algebra. Instead of going down that rabbit hole (and save it for another day), I would like to instead go into the etymology and definition of excactly what an algebra exactly is. The secret is that there is no actual formal definition for what an algebra is. Separate subfields of math (and also computer science) have a different definition of what an algebra entails. I would also like to preempt criticism of sloppy definitions (escpecially from category theorists) with the statement that my knowledge of category theory is derived exactly from Riehl's Category Theory in Context and a bunch of videos from [Sheafification of G](https://www.youtube.com/@SheafificationOfG). 
## (Some of) The Computer Science Algebras
If you have ever taken a course on databases, I am sure you are familiar with relational algebra. This is a system of decomposing relational database operations into a set of formal operations. Things like Boyce-Codd Normal Form, theta joins, and the like are all captured by this system. Kleene algebras (which are semirings with a star expression) are used to axiomatize regular expressions and languages. Process algebras like CCS, CSP, and the $\lambda$ calculus are used everywhere in the models of distributed systems (modeling) and to represent concurrency. 

## The Linear Algebras (Pun not intended)
A common interpretation of an algebras is that of a vector space with a bilinear product: i.e. the algebra is defined depending on what the product sould do. Associative algebras are the default of this category. This is things like matrix algebras, polynomial rings, and group algebras. The product of any two members of this space would be bilinear. Another algebra gaining in popularity from the field of physics is the Lie algebra which is antisymmetric and satisfies the Jacobi identity. It exists explicitly to satisfy the tangent structure of Lie groups and the requirement of continuous symmetry in physics. Mathemaniac has a really good [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gj4kvpy1eCE&t=546s) that I would recommend watching. Similarly, Jordan algebras are those which have a commutative product with the Jordan identity and exist explicitly due to an axiom from quantum-mechanics. Clifford algebras are built from quadratic form on a space. They are meant to represent rotations, reflections, and spinors, which you can think of as rank 0.5 tensors. Awesome video from eigenchris on this, and more background on his channel on this, as well as Grassman/Exterior algebras. These algebras satisfy an alternating product and aim to represent determinants beyond what you might have learned in a linear algebra class. There are also Hopf algebras, which are also coalgebras and have an antipode. In regular english, this means that you can comultiply (do the opposite of what the product should do) and invert. This makes Hopf algebras super useful for combinatorics since comultiplication allows you to map an element of a tensor product of elements back and also map individiual units back. The antipode is a linear map roughly equivalent to a generalize3d inverse, which allows you to emulate the behavior of a continuous group but in a linear setting, from my understanding. I am not as well versed on knots and quantum theory (read: not at all beyond preliminary reading) so there is a high change I have completely misconstrued this. That being said, another algebra from quantum mechanics is Banach/C* algebra (depending if you come from functioning analysis or quantum mechanics). This algebra comes, for free, with analytic structure (a whole norm that's submultiplicative and an involution for C*!). More algebras from physics which I barely understand but came up when I was doing research are Poisson algebras which have a commutative product and also have a Lie bracket and interact vie Liebniz. From what I read, this algebra is mainly used to represent and model observable objects in phase space. The final algebra which came up was Vertex and/or operator algebras. The motivation for this was 2D conformal field theory and I saw something about moonshine, but if any physicists could please reach out regarding this algebra it would be much appreciated since I have 0 clue what I read when I was doing background research on this. 
## The Logical Algebras
Some of the algebras here may be familiar to you if you have ever had a discrete math course. The definition of an algebra differs here. Here, the definition is instead a "lattice" with complement-esque operations. The operations are familiar ones: meet, join, and complement which are closer to set theory and logic than formal math. The first algebra, and the one that might ring a bell even if not, is boolean algebra. This is a complemented distributed lattice and has classical formal logic, set operation, and powers things like digital circuits. Nothing surprising. An algebra completely out of left field is the Heyting algebra. This algebra drops what is called the law of the excluded middle, meaning that it is a bounded lattice where the statement that for an proposition it or its negation is true is removed. Set algebra (of which $\sigma$ algebra is a member) are colelctions of sets that are closed under complement and countable union. They are used as the basis of measure and probability theory. The last algebra that I found that I could categorize here were MV-algebras/relation algebras (many-valued logic). The extent of these algebras is that they is are structure with a binary operation, unary operation, and have the constant 0. 

## Category Theory
Unfortunately for me, category theory has a pretty good definition of what an algebra actually is. Naively, one can assume an algebra to be an object with some operations. This can be made pretty precise with category theory by converting the operations into morphisims. Normally, an operation on set $S$ is a function $f(S^n) \righarrow S$. Categorically, you would gather all of the object's operations into something called a functor and derive a single morphism from $S$ using it. An algebra, then, means carrying structure, or state, of that form potentially subject to a set of axioms or rules. Depending on what you want to encode (operations and equations or just operations) there are two different ways to create this representation.

### Algebras for an endofunctor
Fix category $C$ and endofunctor $F: C \rightarrow C$. An $F$-algebra is a pair $(A, \alpha)$ where $A$ is an object and $\alpha: F(A) \rightarrow A$ is a morphism, or a map of the structure we want to impose. A homomorphism $(A, \alpha) \rightarrow (B, \beta)$ is a morphism $g: A \rightarrow B$ making the commutation $g \circ \alpha = \beta \circ F(g)$. We define this as the category $F$ algebra. The functor $F$ also serves as what is called a signature. It stores the directionality of operations. For example, on sets, use the example of $F(X) = 1 + (X \times X)$. A map $F(A) = 1 + A \times A\rightarrow A = 1 \rightarrow 1$ by the universal property of the coproduct alongsize a binary operation $A \times A \rightarrow A$. An algebra for $F$ is therefore a set with a constant operation (the map) and a binary operation. This is the same as the signature of a monoid, but without any rules, or axioms to be formal. Varying F obviously yields different signatures. A unique case is the initial $F$-algebra. Lambek's lemma says that the structure map of an initial algebra is an isomorphism, so the initial algebra must be a fixed point $A \simeq F(A)$ which is the same as the least solution of that equation. Using set as an example again, the initial equation is the natural numbers $(\mathbb{N}, [0, succ])$ and the unique homomorphism from it to any other $F$-algebra is defined by recursion. 
### Algebras for a monad
Haskell and Ocamlers rejoice, a use case for your esolangs has come. $F$-algebras capture operations as demonstrated above, but do not capture equations. To get laws you need to upgrade from functors to monads. A quick refresher. A monad is a monoid in the category of endofunctors. In all seriousness, a monad $(T, \eta, \mu)$ is an endofunctor $T$ with natural transformations $\eta : Id \rightarrow T$, which is defined as the unit monad and $\mu: T^2 \rightarrow T$ which is defined as the multiplication monad. These both satisfy the coherence conditions. An algebra for the monad, called the Eilenberg-Moore algebra is a structure map $\alpha : T(A)$ which is compatible with that data. $\alpha \circ \eta_A = id_A$ and $\alpha \circ \mu_A = \alpha \circ T(\alpha)$. The first statement just says that a statement evaluates to itself, while the second states that evaluating a nested expression all at once means evaluating the inner then the outer (think for loops: you do the inside, then the outside). Every single Eilenberg-Moore algebra is an algebra for the functor $T$, but the two coherences are what form algebras out of the maps. More generally: in any monoidal category $(C, \otimes,  I) a monoid object is any object $A$ with multiplication $m: A \otimes A \rightarrow A$ and unit $u: I \rightarrow A$ which satisfies the laws of both associativity and unit for the structure of the monoid. Here are some examples: in $(Set, \times, 1)$ you get good old monoids, in $(Ab, \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}, \mathbb{Z}} you get rings, in $(Vect_k, \otimes_k, k) you get associative unit algebras over field $k$. So techincally, you can define anything in terms of an algebra!
